# DASS Project: Daily Development Log

**Date:** 2026-02-02
**Project Phase:** Phase 1: Authentication & Basic Setup
**Project Milestone:** Day 1: User Login/Registration

---

## 1. Today’s Objective
* get server up and running + start building the basics of the login page

## 2. Tasks Completed
* Initialized Express web application framework. (It simplifies server creation).
Steps
    1. ran 'npm init' in FEMS. (initialized FEMS as a new Node.js project)
    2. Installed express as dependency.
    3. Created app.js and coded it (comments within code)
    4. ran app with **node app.js**
* Setup NPM dotenv (It's a npm package used in NodeJS apps to manage env vars)
    1. ran **npm i dotenv express**
    2. created **.env** file in root directory and set importants vars.
* Setup Postman. (API dev and test tool. Has a GUI to send HTTP requests).
    1. used the installer
* Connect Express to MongoDB + Install and use Mongoose for Data Modelling + Create a user schema
    1. ran **npm i mongoose**
    2. In **db.js**, handled and setup the database connection.
    3. In **models**, setup the required schemas.
* Implement JWT and bcrypt password hashing.
* [ ] Initialized Node.js environment and installed dependencies (Express, Mongoose, JWT, Bcrypt).
* [ ] Configured `.env` for MongoDB URI and JWT Secret.
* [ ] Designed `User` Schema with Role-Based Access Control (RBAC) enums.
* [ ] Implemented `POST /register` with password hashing.
* [ ] Implemented `POST /login` with JWT generation.
* [ ] Verified endpoints via Postman.

## 3. Design & Analysis Decisions

* **Decision:**
Created the following subdirectories within FEMS
* config (db connection logic)
* controllers (contains logic for what to do when a specific request arrives)
* models
* routes

* **Rationale:** 
Learned about and implemented Model-View-Controller (MVC) Design Pattern. Model: Data & Logic. View: UI. Controller: input handling.

* **Decision:**
Created the following schemas within models
* User (base)
* Participants
* Organizers

* **Rationale:** 
To continue with the MVC ideology. I used discriminator, which allowed Participants' and Organizers' to inherit from User. 

[e.g., Using Bcrypt with a salt factor of 10.]

## 4. Challenges & Workarounds
* **Challenge:** Token was not recognized in the header.
* **Workaround:** Didn't consider bearer

## 5. Tools & Resources Used
* **Docs:** Mongoose Documentation, JWT.io for debugging tokens.
* **Consultation:** High-level architectural guidance from Google Gemini.

## 6. Plan for Tomorrow
* Continue